
Embrace

  Interact  Friendliness
  Guide     Temperance
  Empower   Courage
  Action    Modesty

Innovate

  Engage    Liberality
  Invent    Magnificence
  Distill   Honor 12
  Connect   Patience

Encourage

  Augment     Wit
  Intent      Magnanimity
  Ethics      Justice
  Reflect     Truthfulness


---- Mean ----

  Too little 	      Virtuous mean 	  Too much


Cowardice 	      Courage 	        Recklessness
Overindulgence    Temperance        Insensitivity
Meanness 	        Liberality 	      Wastefulness
Stinginess        Magnificence      Vulgarity
Deprecation       Magnanimity       Grandeur
Anger             Patience          Assertiveness
Lying             Truthfulness      Boastfullness
Boorishness 	    Wit 	            Buffoonery
Familar           Friendliness      Aloof
Shy               Modesty           Shameless
Selfishness       Justice           Selflessness
Pettiness 	      Generosity 	      Vulgarity

---- 12 Virtues ----

Courage: The midpoint between cowardice and recklessness. The courageous person is aware of the danger but goes in any way.

Temperance: The virtue between overindulgence and insensitivity. Aristotle would view the person who never drinks just as harshly as the one who drinks too much.

Liberality: The virtue of charity, this is the golden mean between miserliness and giving more than you can afford.

Magnificence: The virtue of living extravagantly. It rests between stinginess and vulgarity. Aristotle sees no reason to be ascetic but also warns against being flashy.

Magnanimity: The virtue relating to pride, it is the midpoint between not giving yourself enough credit and having delusions of grandeur. It is a given that you also have to act on this sense of self-worth and strive for greatness.

Patience: This is the virtue that controls your temper. The patient person must neither get too angry nor fail to get angry when they should.

Truthfulness: The virtue of honesty. Aristotle places it between the vices of habitual lying and being tactless or boastful.

Wit: At the midpoint between buffoonery and boorishness, this is the virtue of a good sense of humor.

Friendliness: While being friendly might not seem like a moral virtue, Aristotle claims friendship is a vital part of a life well lived.  This virtue lies between not being friendly at all and being too friendly towards too many people.

Modesty: The midpoint between being too shy and being shameless. The person who has the right amount of shame will understand when they have committed a social or moral error but won’t be too fearful not to risk them.

Justice: The virtue of dealing fairly with others. It lies between selfishness and selflessness. This virtue can also be applied in different situations and has a whole chapter dedicated to the various forms it can take.

Generosity: Pettiness 	       	      Vulgarity

---- !2 Virtues ----

1) Courage – bravery and valor

2) Temperance – self-control and restraint

 3) Liberality – bigheartness, charity and generosity

 4) Magnificence – radiance, joie de vivre

  5) Pride – Magnanimity- self-satisfaction

6) Honor – respect, reverence, admiration

 7) Good Temper – equanimity, level headedness

8) Friendliness – conviviality and sociability

 9) Truthfulness – straightforwardness, frankness and candor

10) Wit – sense of humor – meaninglessness and absurdity

11) Friendship – camaraderie and companionship

12) Justice – impartiality, evenhandedness and fairness

----  4 Cardinal Virtues

  Prudence
  Temperance
  Courage
  Justice
